1.3 Fire-fighting
Fire fighters specialize in putting down fires. Their main goal is to get to the scene of a fire as quickly as possible. In order to meet this goal, they activate sirens and flashing lights and have their equipment organized for immediate use, at a moment’s notice. Fire-fighting is also characteristic of a particular management approach that focuses on heroic efforts to resolve problems and unexpected crisis. The seeds of these problems are often planted by the same managers, who work the extra hours required to fix them. Fire-fighting has been characterized as an approach where there is never enough time to do things right the first time, but always sufficient time for rework and fixing problems once customers
are complaining and threaten to leave. This reactive approach of management is rarely conducive to serious improvements which rely on data and teamwork. Industrial statistics tools are rarely used under fire-fighting management. As a consequence, decisions in such organizations are often made without investigation of the causes for failures or proactive process improvement initiatives.

In Chapters 2–5 of Part I we study the structure of random phenomena and present statistical tools used to describe and analyze such structures. The basic philosophy of statistical thinking is the realization that variation occurs in all work processes, and the understanding that reducing variation is essential to quality improvement. Failure to recognize the impact of randomness leads to unnecessary and harmful decisions. One example of the failure to understand randomness is the common practice of adjusting production quotas for the following month by relying on the current month’s sales.  Without appropriate tools, managers have no way of knowing whether the current month’s sales are within the common variation range or not. Common variation implies that nothing significant has happened since last month and therefore no quota adjustments should be made. Under such circumstances changes in production quotas create unnecessary, selfinflicted problems. Fire-fighting management, in many cases, is responsible for avoidable costs and quick temporary fixes with negative effects on the future of the organization. Moreover, in such cases, data is usually accumulated and archived without lessons learned or proactive initiatives. Some managers in such an environment will attempt to prevent “fires” from occurring. One approach to prevent such fires is to rely on massive inspection and traditional supervision as opposed
to leadership and personal example. The next section provides some historical background on the methods of inspection.